Contributing: Improve the AI policy (#30268)
FreeCAD/FreeCAD: AI_POLICY.md

# FreeCAD AI Policy

> With recent developments in AI technology it is becoming clear that AI technology will have a big impact on Open Source projects including FreeCAD. This document outlines the core project values regarding the technology and acts as the compass that should guide us in decisions concerning AI. With this policy, the FreeCAD developer community **puts people in the first row** while **acknowledging the concerns**. It enforces **contributions with humans in the driver seat** and raises awareness of **fully open and frugal AI**.

Reviewer: > developments in AI technology it is becoming clear that AI technology

Department of Redundancy Department approves of this sentence 😁. Could be more concise.

Author: I will improve this.

## Concerns over AI

There are various concerns surrounding AI. Although many of these concerns are outside of the influence of the FreeCAD project, we want to highlight them so contributors are aware of the concerns around AI.

The concerns include, but are not limited to:

- **privilege:** only large organizations can effectively train and operate high-performance LLMs, limited accessibility to the technology for the unprivileged, and bias in the datasets and outputs in favor of the privileged
- **environmental:** land use, carbon footprint, and water use for cooling of large data centers
- **copyright:** both potential violations of acquiring training data and in the output of AI, and the challenges to claim copyright on raw generative-AI output
- **societal:** exploiting workers for content moderation, affecting the learning process
- **open source projects:** high-volume of low-quality vibe-coded PRs, interaction with AI chatbots, unclear decision process in agentic AI, and increased burden on reviewers and maintainers

#### Frugal and fully open AI alternatives

> Although the problems with AI regarding open source projects don’t disappear with alternatives, FreeCAD as a project wants to raise awareness of alternatives to the large LLMs that can only be trained by large organizations. Examples are frugal AI initiatives and fully open source AI models such as Apertus by the Swiss AI initiative that is trained on fully open data in a carbon-neutral and water-neutral data center.

Reviewer 2: Promoting specific AI companies makes it look like FreeCAD has a deal with them, which as far as I'm aware is not the case. To me this paragraph feels out of place for a community-driven project, and reduces the impact of the strong statement above. Open AI initiatives won't reduce the amount of spam PRs and cognitive debt that LLM create.

Author: I will remove the specific AI company. In my opinion it does make sense to raise awareness of alternatives and yes, the text acknowledges that it won't help for spam PRs, but it does improve on the other concerns.

With AI contributions it is almost impossible to support these values and to ensure that they are actually followed. That's why for each contribution we expect it to have human behind the wheel throughout the whole process and be presented by humans, not AI tools. While it won't be possible to verify that fully, we trust our community to do the right thing and contribute in a good faith with these values in mind. In particular, we will not accept pull requests with clearly AI-generated code, commit messages, PR descriptions, and responses to reviewer feedback.

## Concrete measures

### Disclosure

> We request disclosure of the used technology with tags in the PR and in the commit messages:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We request disclosure of the used technology with git trailers in the PR description and in the commit messages:
```

1. Given that it is such a sensitive topic, more precise language should remove any ambiguity.
2. Is there any value in adding the trailer to the PR description, if it's already added in the commits? In practical terms, there are high chances that asking for addition in two different places, one is likely to be forgotten. If the two locations are a requirement, it would be best to add the empty `Assisted-by` trailers to the PR template.

Author: Using git trailers is a good suggestion. We also value disclosure in the PR, so we left it in, but disclosure in natural language is fine in that case.

```
Assisted-by: [Model-Family] ([Version/ID])
```

Examples:

```
Assisted-by: gemini-2.5-pro (rev-1)
Assisted-by: GPT-4o-2024-08-06
```

#### PR template

> We modify the Pull Request template to include a required checkbox that says “This PR is not unverified AI output, I take responsibility for it, and all communications on this PR is done by me.”. Don't be afraid that your English is not perfect - we are mostly non-native speakers. We don't recommend using machine translation, but if you do - add original text too.

Reviewer 4: Should this paragraph be in the policy or should this PR also change the template?

Author: It would be good to incorporate that in the PR template immediately. I just took a look, but it will probably mean that the current template needs to be transformed in a yaml one. @maxwxyz, are you familiar with that? (I'm not).

Reviewer 4: no, currently it only has placeholder text in the text box

Author: Ok, I updated the PR template to reflect the changes of the AI policy.

> We modify the Pull Request template to include a required checkbox that says “This PR is not unverified AI output, I take responsibility for it, and all communications on this PR is done by me.”. Don't be afraid that your English is not perfect - we are mostly non-native speakers. We don't recommend using machine translation, but if you do - add original text too.

Reviewer: > and all communications on this PR is done by me

1. `s/is/are/`
2. A significant number of vibe developers have a very liberal definition of "done by me", where they consider the replies to their prompt to be functionally theirs. I think this doesn't insist enough on the fact the sentences must be organic and so must be the thought process that constructed them, as banning the ChatGPT-esque re-phrasings seems to be the goal here.

Author: Good point, I will improve this.
